Hey everyone, today we will set up Nexus
using some of the latest and greatest
tech available. Apply the popular
dendritic pattern with flake ports.
Configure neri and noctalia shell by
wrapping them making your desktop
portable. And by the end, you'll have a
fully reproducible setup that's easy to
extend and can rival even the most
advanced Nexos configurations. I am also
leaving all the commands and files you
will see today on vimjer.com. So, open
it in your browser if you want to follow
along and let's get right into it.
Starting with the most basic Nixxos
installation. I have just installed
Nixos with the graphical installer. And
from here we are presented with Gnome
desktop as well as our two generated
files in / etsy/nixos.
Configuration.nix with our generated
configuration and hardware
configuration.nix with hardware specific
options. We will get back to them later
because before we begin configuring our
system, I suggest we first initialize a
flake and golden ditic. Flakes are
basically a must have in 2026 and the
popular dendritic pattern will make
extending our flake very simple. To
begin, create a new directory somewhere
in your home directory. Name it whatever
you want and let's build our flake here.
I've prepared a small template
specifically for this video. So to save
a little bit of time, let's run this
command to initialize a basic dendritic
flake. We don't really have to touch the
flake at all today, but just so we
understand what it does, let's take a
look inside. Here you will find four
inputs. Nyx packages, the main package
repository, flake parts, the framework
that we will use to structure our flake
import tree, a helper that imports all
modules recursively, and wrapper
modules, which we will later use to
configure programs. The key components
of the dendritic pattern here are flake
parts and import tree, which together
forces to follow a consistent file
structure, but remove a ton of
refactoring and file cross referencing
friction. So let's close our flake and
start filling our modules directory. The
general convention among Nyx users is to
have a hosts directory with a
subdirectory for each specific machine.
So I suggest we go with it as well. I
will create a directory named my machine
and inside a default.nix file which will
serve as an entry point for this
specific machine. But the naming here is
absolutely arbitrary. You could call
your files and directories whatever you
want. Now let's open it. And here like
with every other file in the modules
directory we have to start with flake
parts boilerplate. All files we will
create today will look like this just
filled with different content. In this
one we will define a Nexus system named
my machine assigned to a Nexus system
function found in Nyx packages coming
from the inputs provided by the flake
parts module. Without flake parts we
would basically write the same thing in
our flake directly but with it we are
just putting it alongside our
configuration for simplicity and
readability. Now let's create another
file called configuration.nix
with the exact same structure but
instead of defining a Nix system. We
will define a Nix module name something
like my machine configuration. Then
simply copy your entire generated
configuration.nix file into its
definition. Just be very careful here
because your configuration.nix file will
likely be a bit longer than my example.
And don't forget to add a semicolon in
the end. Also, let's enable flakes here
just so we have access to modern Nix
commands. You can move this option
elsewhere later. Now, let's do the same
thing with our hardware configuration.
So, create a hardware configuration.nix
file. Fill it with flake parts
boilerplate. Define another Nexus module
named something like my machine hardware
and copy your entire generated hardware
configuration.nix content inside. All
right, so we have three files now, and
now all that's left to do is to connect
them all together, which we can do by
simply referencing the names we chose.
In the configuration.nix file, we will
add our hardware module to the imports,
similar to how it was by default, but
using a named reference instead. And in
the default.nix file, we will add our
configuration module to the modules
list. Notice that both of them are taken
from self because self refers to the
outputs of our flake. So anything we
defined in our flake parts files can be
referenced through it. That's one of the
reasons we use flake parts for seamless
references to any other part of your
flake by name. Not that useful for files
located in the same directory. But when
we start creating more modules and
packages, it will come in handy. Okay,
so we are done turning our basic
generated configuration into a dendritic
flake. And now just to test that it's
working fine, we can run this Nexus
rebuild switch command which should
already work. The tedious part is over
and now comes the fun part because we
will now set up and configure Neri. To
do it, let's create another directory
called features where we will create
feature files to be used by our
configurations. The first feature will
of course be Neri itself. So create a
Neri.nix file and fill it with that same
flake part boilerplate. If we were
working with a normal flake, we would
export our custom preconfigured Neri
package as an x8664 Linux package. But
we are working with flake parts. So
instead, it's a lot more convenient to
use the pers system subm module. It will
output our package for every supported
system architecture automatically. Now
to configure it, let's use the neri.wrap
function from the wrapper modules input.
And this right here is basically the
full structure you will want to use to
wrap any other programs later. Now let's
set some neri settings inside. This will
get translated to near KDL format
dynamically. So just use your
imagination. I guess I will also leave
my near configuration in the description
as an example. I suggest you to set some
settings for your keyboard, your gaps
and most importantly your keybinds.
Notice how to spawn programs. We are
using the get exe function coming from
lib which makes our near package depend
on those programs removing the need to
add them to system packages. Then before
we go and make this Neri package be a
part of our Nix configuration, we can
already try it out by simply running it
with this Nyx run command. It will
launch Neri as a simple foreground
application where you'll be able to play
around with it using your alt key
instead of super as a modifier. This is
one of the main advantages this setup
gives us. Everything we put in the flake
bars modules also becomes an output of
your flake. And since rep packages are
still just packages, we can run them all
individually from any machine completely
independent from your Nixos. If you
want, go ahead and try running my new
reset with this Nyx run command. You'll
see all my key bindings, all my
settings, my bar, all in one native
package that's neither a virtual machine
nor a container. Similarly, I also have
a package for my preconfigured Neovim, a
package with my entire shell environment
and even a package that's my entire
desktop setup. All runnable with one
command individually without messing up
your user home directory. Pure magic. If
you upload your flake with today's setup
to GitHub, you'll be able to do this
too. But back to our configuration. When
you are more or less satisfied with the
result, we can finally make this rap
neri package be a part of our Nixos
configuration. And to do that, we just
need to define another Nexos module
right in this Neri file. Call it just
Neri for example. And inside we will
enable the Nexos Ni option and assign
the NRI.package option to our near
package we just created by simply
grabbing it from itself. That's pretty
much it. Now we can go back to our
configuration.nix file and place the
Neri module we just created in the
imports. Once again with flake parts, we
don't care where it's located. We just
need to know the name of the output. Now
if you do a Nixos rebuild, Nixos will
enable all critical components required
by Neri and you will have NRI available
both as a command and in your display
manager. All right. So we have a flake.
Our setup is dendritic. We have Neri.
But what we don't have yet is a
beautiful bar to go alongside it. So
let's also install and configure
Nocttalia shell. To get started, let's
create another feature file called
Nocttalia.nix.
Fill it with flake parts boilerplate.
Once again at pers system because we are
working with a package and declare a
package called my Nocttalia. Then assign
it to the output of the rap function
from the Noctalia shell module. And now
we can configure it with settings. Let
me show you how you can configure it
quickly. First when you are in Neri
launch Noctalia shell with a simple Nyx
run command. And then trust me when I
say it you need to open its settings
panel with a right-click button and
start configuring it from the graphical
interface. I know we don't do this here
very often, but it will make a lot more
sense in a moment. So, just play around
with the settings, try to get it to look
the way you want it to, and then after
you are more or less satisfied with the
result, run this command, which you will
find in the description. It will take
all the settings you have applied and
output them to a JSON file. Then we just
need to use the read file function along
with from JSON function to read this
file in our Nocttalia module. And boom.
Now, if you run my Nocttalia package
from your flake, you'll get that exact
preconfigured Nocttalia shell. And all
that's left to do now is to go to your
Neri configuration and add your
Nocttalia package taken from self to the
spawn at startup setting. This will make
Nocttalia start alongside Neri and make
it a dependency of your Neri package.
Though, instead of hard- coding the
system architecture, it is of course
better to use the self-prime package
reference provided by the persist
submodio. Self-prime basically works
just like self except it fills in the
system architecture for you.
Additionally, since Nectalia comes with
its own launcher, let's also create a
keybind for it. And that's pretty much
all you need to get started. Rebuild
your system. And now we have a dendritic
flake configured neri a bar to go along
with it. And from this point onward, you
can continue extending the flake with
more nixes modules, more rep programs,
and whatever else you want really. If
you want to add more machines to your
setup, simply repeat the steps from the
beginning. And if you want more features
for those machines, just add them to the
features directory. To explore all
wrapper modules and settings they
provide, check out the official wiki
page, I'll leave it in the description.
The library also includes modules for
deeper integration with both Nixos and
Flake parts that we didn't explore
today. So make sure to give it a proper
read. It is really cool. And the final
important thing we need to address is
probably Xway satellite because Neri
does not do Xon by itself. So, unless
you don't use any X11 only programs,
make sure to add this line to your
nearest settings. And now, I'd like to
thank all the amazing people that
support the channel and keep it going
for all the amazing monthly and recent
donations. They really mean the world to
me. And as always, don't forget to check
out our Discord server, a place where I
chat every day and post videos early for
monthly supporters. Leave a like or a
comment if you enjoyed this video, or
subscribe if you are feeling extra
generous. Thanks for watching and I'll
see you in the next one.